Cross-Chain Smart Contracts — Blockchain Roadmap
Cross-chain smart contracts are decentralized applications distributed across multiple different blockchain networks that work together to form a single unified application. This new design paradigm is an important step in the evolution of the multi-chain ecosystem and has the potential to create entirely new categories of smart contract use cases that leverage the unique benefits of different blockchains, sidechains and Layer-2 networks.

Historically, the adoption of smart contracts has occurred largely on the Ethereum mainnet as it was the first blockchain network to support fully programmable smart contracts. Apart from the first-mover advantage, additional factors such as the growing network impact, decentralized architecture, time-tested tools, and an extensive community of Solidity developers have also contributed to Ethereum adoption.
However, as the demand for the Ethereum blockchain exceeds the supply, the increased demand for Ethereum smart contracts has also led to an increase in network transaction fees over time. While the Ethereum mainnet continues to provide one of the most secure networks for smart contract execution, lower-cost alternatives have been sought in the process.

The adoption and use of alternative Layer-1 blockchains, sidechains and smart contracts on Layer-2 have skyrocketed over the past year to meet the needs of users and developers. The multi-chain ecosystem, which was once just a theory, is no longer a theory but a definitive reality, as evidenced by the increasing diversity of the DeFi ecosystem’s Total Value Locked in various on-chain environments. Additional on-chain metrics such as daily active addresses, number of transactions, and network bandwidth consumption also clearly demonstrate the growth of the multi-chain ecosystem.

DefiLlama
DefiLlama is a DeFi TVL aggregator. It is committed to providing accurate data without ads or sponsored content, as…
defillama.com

The availability of new on-chain environments has increased the overall throughput of the smart contract economy as a whole and has led to the engagement of more users who can transact at a lower cost. Also, each blockchain, sidechain, and Layer-2 network offers its own approach to scalability, decentralization, mechanism design, consensus, execution, data availability, privacy, and more. In the multi-chain ecosystem, all these different approaches can be implemented and tested in parallel to advance the development of the ecosystem.

As a result of the evaluation of various Layer-2 scaling solutions, the Ethereum community has implemented the multi-chain approach, also making an aggregation-centered roadmap to scale the efficiency and increase the security of the Ethereum ecosystem.

L2BEAT — The state of the layer two ecosystem
L2BEAT is an analytics and research website about Ethereum layer two (L2) scaling. We provide a comparison of the…
l2beat.com

A rollup-centric ethereum roadmap
What would a rollup-centric ethereum roadmap look like? Last week the Optimism team announced the launch of the first…
ethereum-magicians.org

Layer-2 networks increase the transaction volume of Ethereum-based smart contracts, providing lower fees per transaction while maintaining the security features of the Ethereum mainnet. This layer verifies off-chain computations on the Ethereum base layer blockchain using proofs of validity and is achieved by utilizing data fragmentation to expand the capacity for future collection call data.

To take advantage of the multi-chain ecosystem, many developers are now increasingly deploying their existing smart contract codebases across multiple networks rather than a single blockchain. By developing multi-chain smart contracts, the projects both expanded their user base and experimented with new features on low-cost networks. The multi-chain approach has become increasingly common across numerous DeFi verticals.
While the multi-chain ecosystem provides numerous benefits to both users and developers, running the same smart contract code across multiple blockchains creates a number of unique challenges.

Each new distribution of a multi-chain smart contract code on another blockchain network creates a completely new copy of the application, meaning it is no longer a single unified application. Each contract deployment manages its own internal state with limited or complete interoperability between deployments in different blockchain environments.

While users can access a copy of the app on their preferred network, the user experience doesn’t have to be chain-to-chain. It can also be different.

What are Multi-Chain Contracts? | CosmWasm Documentation
CosmWasm is designed and built from the ground-up to be a multi-chain solution for smart contracts. As it comes from…
docs.cosmwasm.com

Multi-chain smart contracts are dApp deployments that are isolated by nature. This dynamic is most evident in decentralized exchanges that take a multi-chain approach, especially Automated Market Maker (AMM).

DeFi Series: More Capital & Less Risk in Automated Market Makers
Automated Market Maker (AMM) based Decentralized Exchanges (DEXs) have proven to be one of the most impactful DeFi…
blog.chain.lin

Since a user’s assets can only exist on one blockchain at any given time, liquidity within the application as a whole is fragmented across different on-chain environments. It is the liquidity that decreases with each distribution, which leads to a reduction in trading fees for users. Also, every deployment of an AMM on another blockchain starts from scratch with zero liquidity. Liquidity mining programs can result in higher dilution of the protocol’s native token if extended to the new distribution as a way to bootstrapped liquidity.

Any application that requires a single source of truth about the state of the application, such as an on-chain domain name system with a centralized registry, is difficult to implement in a multi-chain. If multiple registry systems are implemented across multiple blockchains, the same name may be registered multiple times on different chains with different owners, causing conflicts.

For this reason, applications that require a global state of consistency are often deployed on only one blockchain network. In addition to application-level challenges, the multi-chain ecosystem can also increase friction for end-users, who may need to learn to interact with an increasing number of networks.

Given that assets on a particular blockchain can only be used within that blockchain-specific dApp, users have to manually bridge between blockchains if they want to use dApps in other on-chain environments. This not only includes reconfiguring their wallets, learning new UX patterns, and managing additional base layer tokens for gas. At the same time, many traditional cross-chain token bridges have security limitations, requiring compromises in security.

The main limitation of multi-chain smart contracts is the limited or lack of interoperability between deployments in different blockchains, sidechains, and Layer-2 networks. While a token bridge exists to support multi-chain applications, the ability to securely transmit data between blockchains opens up an entirely new design paradigm for how smart contracts can be configured.

Welcome
TokenBridge provides data and token transfer capabilities across EVM chains
docs.tokenbridge.net

Secure cross-chain communication enables the creation of cross-chain smart contracts. Cross-chain smart contracts are decentralized applications consisting of separate smart contracts on different blockchain networks that communicate with each other to form a single unified application.
Cross-chain smart contracts are a unified dApp with logic on different blockchains. While this can be approached in different ways, a basic cross-chain smart contract design paradigm allows developers to break up their applications into modular components. In essence, different smart contracts on different chains perform different tasks, but they all stay in sync and work to support a single use case.

This allows developers to leverage different blockchain networks for their unique advantages, developers can build decentralized applications;

A highly censorship-resistant blockchain for tracking asset ownership,

A high-throughput blockchain for low-latency trading,

A decentralized application that uses a blockchain that preserves privacy for the user,

A decentralized storage blockchain for identification and metaverse, for example

they can create.

Furthermore, the cross-chain smart contract design paradigm can be used to enable smoother interoperability between deployments of the same smart contract code across multiple blockchain networks.

This helps standardize the user experience across different on-chain environments for existing multi-chain applications. As a result, cross-chain smart contracts help resolve many of the limitations of existing multi-chain smart contracts and provide entirely new use cases. Here are some examples to showcase the unlimited potential of cross-chain smart contracts:

Change Between Chains
A cross-chain decentralized exchange (DEX) could offer users the ability to execute transactions that provide liquidity from their pools in different blockchain networks, as a way to mitigate the liquidity fragmentation issues of multi-chain DEX deployments.

Cross-chain DEXs can also be designed to allow users to exchange native token from one blockchain environment for native token in a different blockchain environment.

Cross-Chain Yield Aggregation
The cross-chain yield aggregator can distribute user deposited funds to a variety of different DeFi protocols available in the multi-chain ecosystem. By increasing the scope of potential yield generating sources, users can generate more returns without having to manually bridge coins across chains and find the highest yield themselves. This will significantly reduce multi-chain throughput as users will not have to manually bridge between environments. Instead, the entire process should be abstracted.

This design will also have the secondary effect of increasing liquidity across the multi-chain ecosystem by helping to increase the Total Value of Lock-in of DeFi applications in new and upcoming on-chain environments.

Cross-Chain Credit
Cross-chain money markets can encourage the creation of cross-chain loans, allowing users to deposit collateral in a market on one blockchain and then borrow tokens from a market on another blockchain.
This allows users to keep their collateral on a highly secure blockchain of their choice while borrowing on a higher-throughput blockchain for distribution to applications in this on-chain environment.

A cross-chain money market can empower users to borrow tokens from a market distribution on another blockchain with a lower interest rate, and the borrowed funds are then bridged back to the chain from which the loan originated. This can help standardize returns across blockchains and lead to lower costs for borrowers in lower liquidity money market distributions that include higher borrowing interest rates.

Cross-Chain DAOs
DAOs can leverage cross-chain interoperability to enable on-chain voting on one or more high-throughput blockchain networks, and the results can then be transmitted back to the higher-cost blockchain network where the protocol’s underlying management contracts reside. This reduces transaction costs for DAO participants, encouraging greater participation while maintaining on-chain transparency and censorship resistance for each participant.

Get Started with DAO(Decentralized Autonomous Organization) — Blockchain Roadmap
A driverless car is driving around looking for passengers. After unloading a passenger, it uses the income it earns…
medium.com

Furthermore, a cross-chain DAO can seamlessly manage and change the parameters of smart contracts in different blockchain networks, expanding the scope of what can be managed by token holders in one or more on-chain environments.

Cross-Chain NFTs
Cross-chain NFT marketplaces can allow users to list and bid on NFTs hosted on any blockchain network. This can help increase the availability and liquidity of NFTs and ensure that they are seamlessly bridged across on-chain environments once the bidding process is complete.

Get Started with NFT(Non Fungible Token) — Blockchain Roadmap
Unique tokens (NFTs) are assets that represent unique tangible and intangible items in a wide range of uses, from…
medium.com

Additionally, on-chain gaming applications located on one blockchain can take advantage of cross-chain interoperability to monitor the ownership of NFTs on another blockchain. This allows users to securely store their NFT on the blockchain of their choice and have the ability to use NFTs in gaming applications on any other blockchain.

Showcase Smart Contracts
Existing single-chain or multi-chain smart contracts can greatly benefit from cross-chain interoperability through the implementation of showcase smart contracts, which are smart contracts that serve as a gateway to a smart contract implementation on another blockchain network. These contracts allow users to remain in the blockchain environment of their choice while depositing and interacting with existing decentralized applications running in a completely different on-chain environment.

Users will no longer need to manually bridge between blockchains to interact with smart contracts that only exist on another blockchain. They may not even need to know which blockchain, sidechain, or Layer-2 network a smart contract implementation is running on.

Showcase smart contracts can be added to any existing decentralized application, such as a derivatives platform or money market, in a backward-compatible manner. This will allow cross-chain interoperability to be added to existing protocols without permission due to the combinable nature of smart contracts. The creation of a more seamless and interoperable ecosystem will significantly increase the growth of the multi-chain economy.

While cross-chain smart contracts represent a major paradigm shift in how decentralized applications can be built, the vast majority of blockchain networks operating at scale today are single-chain by default, meaning they cannot send and receive data locally between different blockchain networks.
To support cross-chain smart contracts, additional infrastructure in the form of bridges is required to enable cross-chain communication.

Blockchain bridges have so far largely focused on transferring tokens, usually from one chain to another, between assets and networks. However, cross-chain smart contracts require more generalized bridges to support the transfer of data packets, tokens, and commands. This type of infrastructure should also be based on a highly secure, reliable and audited code base so that messages are transmitted without corruption, received in a timely manner, and protected against external conditions such as blockchain refactorings. As DONs help solve the blockchain oracle problem, they can also act as a conduit for secure blockchain interoperability.

Being a naturally blockchain-independent protocol, the Chainlink network is integrated across a wide variety of blockchains, sidechains, and Layer-2 networks and is well-positioned to support the transition of the multi-chain ecosystem to cross-chain smart contracts. To achieve this goal, a global open-source standard for cross-chain communication called CCIP has been developed.

Cross-Chain Interoperability Protocol (CCIP) | Chainlink
Cross-Chain Interoperability Protocol (CCIP) provides a universal, open standard for developers to build secure…
chain.link

Compared to traditional cross-chain bridges, CCIP aims to enable smart contracts to securely send both data and tokens on any blockchain. Data messages can be encoded or decoded in any way by smart contracts, supporting a wide degree of flexibility in how they are interpreted. Most importantly, CCIP will leverage the existing collection of very reliable, tamper-proof and blockchain-independent Chainlink oracle nodes that are helping to secure tens of billions of dollars already in the multi-chain DeFi economy.

What Is a Chainlink Node Operator?
Chainlink node operators are the backbone of the Chainlink Network. Chainlink node operators participate within…
blog.chain.link

In addition to a high-quality codebase, CCIP is planned to be made even more secure through an innovative risk management system called Anti-Fraud Network.

The Anti-Fraud Network consists of DONs made up of independent node committees separate from those facilitating CCIP-enabled bridges, whose sole purpose is to monitor CCIP services for blockchain network conditions such as malicious activity and block refactorings.

Chainlink 2.0 and the future of Decentralized Oracle Networks | Chainlink
This whitepaper expands the role of Decentralized Oracle Networks (DONs) in the blockchain ecosystem, laying out the…
chain.link

This additional layer of verification can initiate cross-chain smart contracts and an emergency shutdown of bridges that temporarily pause data transfer to help protect users against potential Black Swan Risk events.

The Black Swan Risk In Cryptocurrency Markets
As most investors have already discovered, there are several risks associated with investing in cryptocurrencies. But…
www.investopedia.com

CCIP will allow messages to be transmitted between blockchains. Hundreds of single-chain and multi-chain smart contract applications are already leveraging Chainlink oracles for off-chain data and trust-minimized computation, and such protocols can leverage the same decentralized infrastructure to support cross-chain interoperability.

In addition to providing the infrastructure for creating cross-chain smart contracts, CCIP also supports the creation of various cross-chain token bridges, allowing users to directly bridge tokens to different blockchains along with commands on how to distribute such tokens.

While there are some inherent challenges in building cross-chain infrastructure, the priority of providing the highest level of security through audited code and a defense measure was a key focus in establishing the CCIP standard.

Its multi-chain ecosystem is open with innovations as more and more developers deploy their apps to additional on-chain environments to increase their user base and attractiveness. But while there are some limitations to the multi-chain smart contract design paradigm, the introduction of cross-chain smart contracts presents a significant opportunity not only to overcome these limitations but ultimately unlock entirely new use cases.

CCIP will help accelerate this transition by aiming to provide the highly reliable and secure cross-chain infrastructure needed to enable decentralized applications to securely transmit random data to smart contracts on any other blockchain network.